# Download atmospheric composition data

The `download_geos()` function accesses and downloads various
atmospheric composition collections from [NASA's Global Earth Observing
System (GEOS) compositional forecast
model](https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/gmao-products/geos-cf/).

## Usage

``` r
download_geos(
  collection = c("aqc_tavg_1hr_g1440x721_v1", "chm_tavg_1hr_g1440x721_v1",
    "met_tavg_1hr_g1440x721_x1", "xgc_tavg_1hr_g1440x721_x1",
    "chm_inst_1hr_g1440x721_p23", "met_inst_1hr_g1440x721_p23"),
  nasa_earth_data_token = NULL,
  date = c("2018-01-01", "2018-01-01"),
  directory_to_save = NULL,
  acknowledgement = FALSE,
  download = FALSE,
  remove_command = FALSE,
  hash = FALSE
)
```

## Arguments

- collection:

  character(1). GEOS-CF data collection file name.

- nasa_earth_data_token:

  character(1). Token for downloading data from NASA. Should be set
  before trying running the function.

- date:

  character(1 or 2). length of 10. Date or start/end dates for
  downloading data. Format "YYYY-MM-DD" (ex. January 1, 2018 =
  `"2018-01-01"`).

- directory_to_save:

  character(1). Directory to save data. Sub-directories will be created
  within `directory_to_save` for each GEOS-CF collection.

- acknowledgement:

  logical(1). By setting `TRUE` the user acknowledges that the data
  downloaded using this function may be very large and use lots of
  machine storage and memory.

- download:

  logical(1). `FALSE` will generate a \*.txt file containing all
  download commands. By setting `TRUE` the function will download all of
  the requested data files.

- remove_command:

  logical(1). Remove (`TRUE`) or keep (`FALSE`) the text file containing
  download commands.

- hash:

  logical(1). By setting `TRUE` the function will return an
  [`rlang::hash_file()`](https://rlang.r-lib.org/reference/hash.html)
  hash character corresponding to the downloaded files. Default is
  `FALSE`.

## Value

- For `hash = FALSE`, NULL

- For `hash = TRUE`, an
  [`rlang::hash_file`](https://rlang.r-lib.org/reference/hash.html)
  character.

- netCDF (.nc4) files will be stored in a collection-specific folder
  within `directory_to_save`.

## Note

Due to NASA data access policies, the download scripts generated by this
function require a valid NASA Earthdata token for authentication and
include options to slow down the download speed to avoid server overload
and potential blocking of access.

## References

Keller CA, Knowland KE, Duncan BN, Liu J, Anderson DC, Das S, Lucchesi
RA, Lundgren EW, Nicely JM, Nielsen E, Ott LE, Saunders E, Strode SA,
Wales PA, Jacob DJ, Pawson S (2021). “Description of the NASA GEOS
Composition Forecast Modeling System GEOS‐CF v1.0.” *Journal of Advances
in Modeling Earth Systems*, **13**(4), e2020MS002413. ISSN 1942-2466,
1942-2466,
[doi:10.1029/2020MS002413](https://doi.org/10.1029/2020MS002413) .

## Author

Mitchell Manware, Insang Song

## Examples

``` r
if (FALSE) { # \dontrun{
download_geos(
  collection = "aqc_tavg_1hr_g1440x721_v1",
  date = "2024-01-01",
  directory_to_save = tempdir(),
  acknowledgement = TRUE,
  download = FALSE, # NOTE: download skipped for examples,
  remove_command = TRUE
)
} # }
```
